README.rst, before:

Python RIS files parser and reader
==================================

A Python 3.6+ reader/writer of RIS reference files.

Usage
-----

Parsing:

.. code:: python

   >>> import rispy
   >>> filepath = 'tests/data/example_full.ris'
   >>> with open(filepath, 'r') as bibliography_file:
   ...     entries = rispy.load(bibliography_file)
   ...     for entry in entries:
   ...         print(entry['id'])
   ...         print(entry['first_authors'])
   12345
   ['Marx, Karl', 'Lindgren, Astrid']
   12345
   ['Marxus, Karlus', 'Lindgren, Astrid']

A file path can also be used to read RIS files. If an encoding is not specified in ``load``, the default system encoding will be used.

.. code:: python

   >>> from pathlib import Path
   >>> import rispy
   >>> p = Path('tests', 'data', 'example_utf_chars.ris')
   >>> entries = rispy.load(p, encoding='utf-8')
   >>> for entry in entries:
   ...     print(entry['authors'][0])
   Dobrokhotova, Yu E.


Writing:

.. code:: python

   >>> import rispy
   >>> entries = [
   ... {'type_of_reference': 'JOUR',
   ...  'id': '42',
   ...  'primary_title': 'The title of the reference',
   ...  'first_authors': ['Marxus, Karlus', 'Lindgren, Astrid']
   ...  },{
   ... 'type_of_reference': 'JOUR',
   ...  'id': '43',
   ...  'primary_title': 'Reference 43',
   ...  'abstract': 'Lorem ipsum'
   ...  }]
   >>> filepath = 'export.ris'
   >>> with open(filepath, 'w') as bibliography_file:
   ...     rispy.dump(entries, bibliography_file)
   

Example RIS entry
-----------------

.. code:: text

   1.
   TY  - JOUR
   ID  - 12345
   T1  - Title of reference
   A1  - Marx, Karl
   A1  - Lindgren, Astrid
   A2  - Glattauer, Daniel
   Y1  - 2014//
   N2  - BACKGROUND: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetuer adipiscing elit. Aenean commodo ligula eget dolor. Aenean massa. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.  RESULTS: Donec quam felis, ultricies nec, pellentesque eu, pretium quis, sem. Nulla consequat massa quis enim. CONCLUSIONS: Donec pede justo, fringilla vel, aliquet nec, vulputate eget, arcu. In enim justo, rhoncus ut, imperdiet a, venenatis vitae, justo. Nullam dictum felis eu pede mollis pretium.
   KW  - Pippi
   KW  - Nordwind
   KW  - Piraten
   JF  - Lorem
   JA  - lorem
   VL  - 9
   IS  - 3
   SP  - e0815
   CY  - United States
   PB  - Fun Factory
   PB  - Fun Factory USA
   SN  - 1932-6208
   M1  - 1008150341
   L2  - http://example.com
   ER  -


TAG_KEY_MAPPING
---------------

The most fields contain string values, but some like first_authors (A1) are parsed into lists. The default mapping were created from specifications scattered around the web, but to our knowledge there is not one single source of RIS truth, so these may need to be modified for specific export systems:

- Wikipedia_
- ResearcherId_
- Refman_
- `Refman (RIS format)`_
- Zotero_

.. _Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RIS_(file_format)
.. _ResearcherId: https://web.archive.org/web/20170707033254/http://www.researcherid.com/resources/html/help_upload.htm
.. _Refman: https://web.archive.org/web/20110930172154/http://www.refman.com/support/risformat_intro.asp
.. _`Refman (RIS format)`: https://web.archive.org/web/20120526103719/http://refman.com/support/risformat_intro.asp
.. _Zotero: https://github.com/zotero/translators/blob/master/RIS.js

Complete list of ListType tags
******************************

.. code:: python

    >>> from rispy import LIST_TYPE_TAGS
    >>> print(LIST_TYPE_TAGS)
    ['A1', 'A2', 'A3', 'A4', 'AU', 'KW', 'N1']


Complete default mapping
************************

.. code:: python

    >>> from rispy import TAG_KEY_MAPPING
    >>> from pprint import pprint
    >>> pprint(TAG_KEY_MAPPING)
    {'A1': 'first_authors',
     'A2': 'secondary_authors',
     'A3': 'tertiary_authors',
     'A4': 'subsidiary_authors',
     'AB': 'abstract',
     'AD': 'author_address',
     'AN': 'accession_number',
     'AU': 'authors',
     'C1': 'custom1',
     'C2': 'custom2',
     'C3': 'custom3',
     'C4': 'custom4',
     'C5': 'custom5',
     'C6': 'custom6',
     'C7': 'custom7',
     'C8': 'custom8',
     'CA': 'caption',
     'CN': 'call_number',
     'CY': 'place_published',
     'DA': 'date',
     'DB': 'name_of_database',
     'DO': 'doi',
     'DP': 'database_provider',
     'EP': 'end_page',
     'ER': 'end_of_reference',
     'ET': 'edition',
     'ID': 'id',
     'IS': 'number',
     'J2': 'alternate_title1',
     'JA': 'alternate_title2',
     'JF': 'alternate_title3',
     'JO': 'journal_name',
     'KW': 'keywords',
     'L1': 'file_attachments1',
     'L2': 'file_attachments2',
     'L4': 'figure',
     'LA': 'language',
     'LB': 'label',
     'M1': 'note',
     'M3': 'type_of_work',
     'N1': 'notes',
     'N2': 'notes_abstract',
     'NV': 'number_of_volumes',
     'OP': 'original_publication',
     'PB': 'publisher',
     'PY': 'year',
     'RI': 'reviewed_item',
     'RN': 'research_notes',
     'RP': 'reprint_edition',
     'SE': 'section',
     'SN': 'issn',
     'SP': 'start_page',
     'ST': 'short_title',
     'T1': 'primary_title',
     'T2': 'secondary_title',
     'T3': 'tertiary_title',
     'TA': 'translated_author',
     'TI': 'title',
     'TT': 'translated_title',
     'TY': 'type_of_reference',
     'UK': 'unknown_tag',
     'UR': 'url',
     'VL': 'volume',
     'Y1': 'publication_year',
     'Y2': 'access_date'}

Override key mapping
********************

The parser use a ``TAG_KEY_MAPPING``, which one can override by calling ``rispy.load()`` with the ``mapping`` parameter.

.. code:: python

   >>> from copy import deepcopy
   >>> import rispy
   >>> from pprint import pprint

   >>> filepath = 'tests/data/example_full.ris'
   >>> mapping = deepcopy(rispy.TAG_KEY_MAPPING)
   >>> mapping["SP"] = "pages_this_is_my_fun"
   >>> with open(filepath, 'r') as bibliography_file:
   ...     entries = rispy.load(bibliography_file, mapping=mapping)
   ...     pprint(sorted(entries[0].keys()))
   ['alternate_title2',
    'alternate_title3',
    'file_attachments2',
    'first_authors',
    'id',
    'issn',
    'keywords',
    'note',
    'notes_abstract',
    'number',
    'pages_this_is_my_fun',
    'place_published',
    'primary_title',
    'publication_year',
    'publisher',
    'secondary_authors',
    'type_of_reference',
    'url',
    'volume']

List tags can be customized in the same way, by passing a list to the ``list_tags`` parameter.

Changing rispy behavior
*********************

There are a few flags that can be passed to ``rispy.load()`` and ``rispy.dump()`` that change how ``rispy`` deals with tags. For example, setting ``skip_unknown_tags`` to ``True`` will cause ``rispy`` do not read or write tags not in the tag map. More can be found in the docstrings for each class. If more customization is necessary, a custom implementation can be created (see next section).


Using custom implementations
----------------------------
Not all RIS files follow the same formatting guidelines. There is an interface for creating custom implementations for reading and writing such files. An implementation contains the methods and parameters used to work with RIS files, and should be passed to ``rispy.load()`` or ``rispy.dump()``.


Customizing implementations
***************************
Creating a custom implentation involves creating a class that inherits a base class, and overriding the necessary variables and methods. One of the existing parsers can also be inherited. Inheriting an existing class is advantageous if only minor changes need to be made. The sections below document what is available to be overriden, along with a few examples.

Parsing
^^^^^^^
Custom parsers can inherit ``RisParser`` (the default parser) or ``BaseParser``. Various parameters and methods can be overridden when creating a new parser. These are documented in the ``BaseParser`` docstring.

Examples:

.. code:: python
   
   class WokParser(BaseParser):
       """Subclass of Base for reading Wok RIS files."""

       START_TAG = "PT"
       IGNORE = ["FN", "VR", "EF"]
       PATTERN = r"^[A-Z][A-Z0-9] |^ER\s?|^EF\s?"
       DEFAULT_MAPPING = WOK_TAG_KEY_MAPPING
       DEFAULT_LIST_TAGS = WOK_LIST_TYPE_TAGS

       def get_content(self, line):
           return line[2:].strip()

       def is_header(self, line):
           return True

Writing
^^^^^^^

Writing is very similar to parsing. A custom writer class can inherit ``BaseWriter`` or one if its subclasses, such as ``RisWriter``.

Examples:

.. code:: python

   class RisWriter(BaseWriter):
       """Subclass of BaseWriter for writing RIS files."""

       START_TAG = "TY"
       PATTERN = "{tag}  - {value}"
       DEFAULT_MAPPING = TAG_KEY_MAPPING
       DEFAULT_LIST_TAGS = LIST_TYPE_TAGS

       def set_header(self, count):
           return "{i}.".format(i=count)

Software for other RIS-like formats
-----------------------------------
Some RIS-like formats contain rich citation data, for example lists and nested attributes, that :code:`rispy` does not
support. Software specializing on these formats include:

* `nbib <https://pypi.org/project/nbib/>`_ parses the "PubMed" or "MEDLINE" format


Developer instructions
----------------------

Common developer commands are in the provided `Makefile`; if you don't have `make` installed, you can view the make commands and run the commands from the command-line manually:

.. code:: bash

   # setup environment
   python -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate
   pip install -e .[dev,test]

   # check if code format changes are required
   make lint
   
   # reformat code
   make format

   # run tests
   make test 

Github Actions are currently enabled to run `lint` and `test` when submitting a pull-request.

Commit message:

Create utils file (#37)
* Create utils file

* Move invert_dictionary
* Add method to use TYPE_OF_REFERENCE_MAPPING

* Add test

* Add documentation for type conversion

* fix formatting

* Clarify documentation

* Fix test

README.rst, after:

Python RIS files parser and reader
==================================

A Python 3.6+ reader/writer of RIS reference files.

Usage
-----

Parsing:

.. code:: python

   >>> import rispy
   >>> filepath = 'tests/data/example_full.ris'
   >>> with open(filepath, 'r') as bibliography_file:
   ...     entries = rispy.load(bibliography_file)
   ...     for entry in entries:
   ...         print(entry['id'])
   ...         print(entry['first_authors'])
   12345
   ['Marx, Karl', 'Lindgren, Astrid']
   12345
   ['Marxus, Karlus', 'Lindgren, Astrid']

A file path can also be used to read RIS files. If an encoding is not specified in ``load``, the default system encoding will be used.

.. code:: python

   >>> from pathlib import Path
   >>> import rispy
   >>> p = Path('tests', 'data', 'example_utf_chars.ris')
   >>> entries = rispy.load(p, encoding='utf-8')
   >>> for entry in entries:
   ...     print(entry['authors'][0])
   Dobrokhotova, Yu E.


Writing:

.. code:: python

   >>> import rispy
   >>> entries = [
   ... {'type_of_reference': 'JOUR',
   ...  'id': '42',
   ...  'primary_title': 'The title of the reference',
   ...  'first_authors': ['Marxus, Karlus', 'Lindgren, Astrid']
   ...  },{
   ... 'type_of_reference': 'JOUR',
   ...  'id': '43',
   ...  'primary_title': 'Reference 43',
   ...  'abstract': 'Lorem ipsum'
   ...  }]
   >>> filepath = 'export.ris'
   >>> with open(filepath, 'w') as bibliography_file:
   ...     rispy.dump(entries, bibliography_file)
   

Example RIS entry
-----------------

.. code:: text

   1.
   TY  - JOUR
   ID  - 12345
   T1  - Title of reference
   A1  - Marx, Karl
   A1  - Lindgren, Astrid
   A2  - Glattauer, Daniel
   Y1  - 2014//
   N2  - BACKGROUND: Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetuer adipiscing elit. Aenean commodo ligula eget dolor. Aenean massa. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.  RESULTS: Donec quam felis, ultricies nec, pellentesque eu, pretium quis, sem. Nulla consequat massa quis enim. CONCLUSIONS: Donec pede justo, fringilla vel, aliquet nec, vulputate eget, arcu. In enim justo, rhoncus ut, imperdiet a, venenatis vitae, justo. Nullam dictum felis eu pede mollis pretium.
   KW  - Pippi
   KW  - Nordwind
   KW  - Piraten
   JF  - Lorem
   JA  - lorem
   VL  - 9
   IS  - 3
   SP  - e0815
   CY  - United States
   PB  - Fun Factory
   PB  - Fun Factory USA
   SN  - 1932-6208
   M1  - 1008150341
   L2  - http://example.com
   ER  -


TAG_KEY_MAPPING
---------------

The most fields contain string values, but some like first_authors (A1) are parsed into lists. The default mapping were created from specifications scattered around the web, but to our knowledge there is not one single source of RIS truth, so these may need to be modified for specific export systems:

- Wikipedia_
- ResearcherId_
- Refman_
- `Refman (RIS format)`_
- Zotero_

.. _Wikipedia: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RIS_(file_format)
.. _ResearcherId: https://web.archive.org/web/20170707033254/http://www.researcherid.com/resources/html/help_upload.htm
.. _Refman: https://web.archive.org/web/20110930172154/http://www.refman.com/support/risformat_intro.asp
.. _`Refman (RIS format)`: https://web.archive.org/web/20120526103719/http://refman.com/support/risformat_intro.asp
.. _Zotero: https://github.com/zotero/translators/blob/master/RIS.js

Complete list of ListType tags
******************************

.. code:: python

    >>> from rispy import LIST_TYPE_TAGS
    >>> print(LIST_TYPE_TAGS)
    ['A1', 'A2', 'A3', 'A4', 'AU', 'KW', 'N1']


Complete default mapping
************************

.. code:: python

    >>> from rispy import TAG_KEY_MAPPING
    >>> from pprint import pprint
    >>> pprint(TAG_KEY_MAPPING)
    {'A1': 'first_authors',
     'A2': 'secondary_authors',
     'A3': 'tertiary_authors',
     'A4': 'subsidiary_authors',
     'AB': 'abstract',
     'AD': 'author_address',
     'AN': 'accession_number',
     'AU': 'authors',
     'C1': 'custom1',
     'C2': 'custom2',
     'C3': 'custom3',
     'C4': 'custom4',
     'C5': 'custom5',
     'C6': 'custom6',
     'C7': 'custom7',
     'C8': 'custom8',
     'CA': 'caption',
     'CN': 'call_number',
     'CY': 'place_published',
     'DA': 'date',
     'DB': 'name_of_database',
     'DO': 'doi',
     'DP': 'database_provider',
     'EP': 'end_page',
     'ER': 'end_of_reference',
     'ET': 'edition',
     'ID': 'id',
     'IS': 'number',
     'J2': 'alternate_title1',
     'JA': 'alternate_title2',
     'JF': 'alternate_title3',
     'JO': 'journal_name',
     'KW': 'keywords',
     'L1': 'file_attachments1',
     'L2': 'file_attachments2',
     'L4': 'figure',
     'LA': 'language',
     'LB': 'label',
     'M1': 'note',
     'M3': 'type_of_work',
     'N1': 'notes',
     'N2': 'notes_abstract',
     'NV': 'number_of_volumes',
     'OP': 'original_publication',
     'PB': 'publisher',
     'PY': 'year',
     'RI': 'reviewed_item',
     'RN': 'research_notes',
     'RP': 'reprint_edition',
     'SE': 'section',
     'SN': 'issn',
     'SP': 'start_page',
     'ST': 'short_title',
     'T1': 'primary_title',
     'T2': 'secondary_title',
     'T3': 'tertiary_title',
     'TA': 'translated_author',
     'TI': 'title',
     'TT': 'translated_title',
     'TY': 'type_of_reference',
     'UK': 'unknown_tag',
     'UR': 'url',
     'VL': 'volume',
     'Y1': 'publication_year',
     'Y2': 'access_date'}

Override key mapping
********************

The parser use a ``TAG_KEY_MAPPING``, which one can override by calling ``rispy.load()`` with the ``mapping`` parameter.

.. code:: python

   >>> from copy import deepcopy
   >>> import rispy
   >>> from pprint import pprint

   >>> filepath = 'tests/data/example_full.ris'
   >>> mapping = deepcopy(rispy.TAG_KEY_MAPPING)
   >>> mapping["SP"] = "pages_this_is_my_fun"
   >>> with open(filepath, 'r') as bibliography_file:
   ...     entries = rispy.load(bibliography_file, mapping=mapping)
   ...     pprint(sorted(entries[0].keys()))
   ['alternate_title2',
    'alternate_title3',
    'file_attachments2',
    'first_authors',
    'id',
    'issn',
    'keywords',
    'note',
    'notes_abstract',
    'number',
    'pages_this_is_my_fun',
    'place_published',
    'primary_title',
    'publication_year',
    'publisher',
    'secondary_authors',
    'type_of_reference',
    'url',
    'volume']

List tags can be customized in the same way, by passing a list to the ``list_tags`` parameter.

Changing rispy behavior
*********************

There are a few flags that can be passed to ``rispy.load()`` and ``rispy.dump()`` that change how ``rispy`` deals with tags. For example, setting ``skip_unknown_tags`` to ``True`` will cause ``rispy`` do not read or write tags not in the tag map. More can be found in the docstrings for each class. If more customization is necessary, a custom implementation can be created (see next section).


Using custom implementations
----------------------------
Not all RIS files follow the same formatting guidelines. There is an interface for creating custom implementations for reading and writing such files. An implementation contains the methods and parameters used to work with RIS files, and should be passed to ``rispy.load()`` or ``rispy.dump()``.


Customizing implementations
***************************
Creating a custom implentation involves creating a class that inherits a base class, and overriding the necessary variables and methods. One of the existing parsers can also be inherited. Inheriting an existing class is advantageous if only minor changes need to be made. The sections below document what is available to be overriden, along with a few examples.

Parsing
^^^^^^^
Custom parsers can inherit ``RisParser`` (the default parser) or ``BaseParser``. Various parameters and methods can be overridden when creating a new parser. These are documented in the ``BaseParser`` docstring.

Examples:

.. code:: python
   
   class WokParser(BaseParser):
       """Subclass of Base for reading Wok RIS files."""

       START_TAG = "PT"
       IGNORE = ["FN", "VR", "EF"]
       PATTERN = r"^[A-Z][A-Z0-9] |^ER\s?|^EF\s?"
       DEFAULT_MAPPING = WOK_TAG_KEY_MAPPING
       DEFAULT_LIST_TAGS = WOK_LIST_TYPE_TAGS

       def get_content(self, line):
           return line[2:].strip()

       def is_header(self, line):
           return True

Writing
^^^^^^^

Writing is very similar to parsing. A custom writer class can inherit ``BaseWriter`` or one if its subclasses, such as ``RisWriter``.

Examples:

.. code:: python

   class RisWriter(BaseWriter):
       """Subclass of BaseWriter for writing RIS files."""

       START_TAG = "TY"
       PATTERN = "{tag}  - {value}"
       DEFAULT_MAPPING = TAG_KEY_MAPPING
       DEFAULT_LIST_TAGS = LIST_TYPE_TAGS

       def set_header(self, count):
           return "{i}.".format(i=count)


Other functionality
-------------------
Other various utilities included in ``rispy`` are documented below.

Reference type conversion
*************************

A method is available to convert common RIS reference types into more readable terms. It takes a list of references and returns a copy of that list with modified reference types. The map for this conversion is located in ``config.py``.

.. code:: python

   >>> from rispy.utils import convert_reference_types
   >>> refs = [{"type_of_reference": "JOUR"}]
   >>> print(convert_reference_types(refs))
   [{'type_of_reference': 'Journal'}]


Software for other RIS-like formats
-----------------------------------
Some RIS-like formats contain rich citation data, for example lists and nested attributes, that :code:`rispy` does not
support. Software specializing on these formats include:

* `nbib <https://pypi.org/project/nbib/>`_ parses the "PubMed" or "MEDLINE" format


Developer instructions
----------------------

Common developer commands are in the provided `Makefile`; if you don't have `make` installed, you can view the make commands and run the commands from the command-line manually:

.. code:: bash

   # setup environment
   python -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate
   pip install -e .[dev,test]

   # check if code format changes are required
   make lint
   
   # reformat code
   make format

   # run tests
   make test 

Github Actions are currently enabled to run `lint` and `test` when submitting a pull-request.
